## Differential gene expression

*NOTE: This section is based on the code provided in the [DESeq2](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/3.1/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) vignette, which can be checked for extra information.*

The new documentation is quite extensive and provides examples for many situations, e.g. multi-factor design, interactions of factors, time series experiments, ... (see also: [workflows on bioconductor](http://www.bioconductor.org/help/workflows/rnaseqGene/)). The documentation provides also methods and protocols for data quality assessment.

A basic task in the analysis of expression data is the detection of differentially expressed genes. The *DESeq2* package provides a method to test for differential expression by using a generalised linear model in which counts are modeled with a negative binomial distribution. It expects a matrix of count values where each column corresponds to a sample and each line to a feature (e.g. a gene). Typically, a *DESeq2* analysis is performed in three steps: count normalisation, dispersion estimation and differential expression test, although the authors also provide a wrapper function for those steps.

### Count normalisation
Since we have already generated a matrix with the normalised counts in the previous section (see [Normalising counts with DESeq2](https://github.com/Functional-Genomics/TeachingMaterial/blob/Cancer-Genomics-07-2015/doc/25.normalising.md#with-deseq2)), we will use it directly as input for the next step.

### Dispersion estimation
An important step in differential expression analysis is to figure out how much variability we can expect in the expression measurements within the same condition. Unless this is known, we cannot make inferences about whether the change in expression observed for a given gene is big enough to be considered significant, or whether it corresponds to the variability that we would expect by chance. This is why it is so important to have replicates: they show how much variation occurs without a difference in the condition.

To create the data:

```rconsole
library(Biobase)
library(DESeq2)

rawcounts<-read.table('../IRAP_example/E-MTAB-2836/tophat2/htseq2/genes.raw.htseq2.tsv',
header=TRUE, row.names=1, sep='\t')

expAnnot<-data.frame(tissue=c('kidney','liver','liver','kidney','liver','kidney'),
        type=c('pe','pe','pe','pe','pe','pe'),
        sex=c('m','m','m','f','f','f'))
row.names(expAnnot)<-c("lERR315383", "lERR315394", 
            "lERR315414", "lERR315443", 
            "lERR315451", "lERR315494")

colData(dds)$tissue=factor(colData(dds)$tissue,
        levels=c("kidney","liver"))
````


In *DESeq2*, we can estimate the size factors:

```rconsole
dds=estimateSizeFactors(dds)
```


In order to estimate the dispersion for each gene, we can use the function *estimateDispersions*:
```rconsole
dds=estimateDispersions(dds)
```


The result of the estimation can be visualised with the *plotDispEsts* function:
```rconsole
pdf(file="./de_dispersion.pdf")
DESeq2::plotDispEsts(dds) #we call explicitely the function plotDispEsts from DESeq2, 
#since DESeq has also a function with the same name but which won't work in this case.
dev.off()
```

### Differential expression test
Finally, we will use the function *nbinomWaldTest* to contrast the two studied conditions:

```rconsole
dds=nbinomWaldTest(dds)
results=results(dds)
results=results[order(results$padj),]
head(results)
```

The *padj* column in the table `dds` contains the p-values adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (i.e. FDR). This is the information that we will use to decide whether the expression of a given gene differs significantly across conditions (e.g. we can arbitrarily decide that genes with an FDR<0.10 are differentially expressed).

#### Exercise 1: 
How would you select those genes that pass a given FDR threshold (e.g. FDR<0.10)? Which are the most significant?
[Solution](https://github.com/barzine/TeachingMaterial/blob/Cancer-Genomics-07-2014/solutions/_de_ex1.md)

Let us generate an MA plot to evaluate the results of the differential expression analysis:

```rconsole
pdf(file="./de_ma.pdf")
plotMA(dds,ylim=c(-8,6))
dev.off()
```

### The *DESeq* wrapper function
The three steps detailed above can be performed with just one single function, which takes as input a DESeqDataSet object like the one we have generated in the previous section (see [Normalising counts with DESeq2](https://github.com/Functional-Genomics/TeachingMaterial/edit/Cancer-Genomics-07-2015/doc/25.normalising.md#with-deseq2)).


```rconsole
dds=DESeq(dds)
results=results(dds)
results=results[order(results$padj),]
head(results)
```

*DESeq2* creates a results table which can be customize. By default the _p_-value cutoff is 0.1, but can be modified.

